# Title Page

**Title:** Caffeine consumption patterns, motivations, and adverse effects among Brazilian esports players: a cross-sectional study

**Authors:**
Ellis Wollis Malta Abhulime¹ [ORCID - 0009-0007-5525-5085]
Heloisa Castanheira Santo André¹ [ORCID - 0000-0001-9177-7410]
Júlia Formagio¹ [ORCID - 0009-0005-5724-2590]
Fabiana Braga Benatti¹ [ORCID - 0000-0002-8320-7044]

**Affiliations:**
¹ Multidisciplinary Laboratory in Food and Health (LabMAS), Faculty of Applied Sciences, State University of Campinas (Campinas, SP, Brazil)

**Corresponding Author:**
Ellis Wollis Malta Abhulime
Email: elliswollismalta@gmail.com
Multidisciplinary Laboratory in Food and Health (LabMAS), School of Applied Sciences (FCA), University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Rua Pedro Zaccaria, 1300, 13484-350, Limeira, São Paulo, Brazil
[ORCID - 0009-0007-5525-5085]

---

# Caffeine consumption patterns, motivations, and adverse effects among Brazilian esports players: a cross-sectional study

# Abstract

**Background:** Electronic sports (esports) have emerged as a global
phenomenon with millions of competitive players worldwide. Caffeine
consumption is prevalent among esports athletes seeking cognitive
enhancement, yet comprehensive data on consumption patterns,
motivations, and safety profiles remain limited, particularly for
Brazilian players. Current literature suggests that while moderate
caffeine doses can improve cognitive performance relevant to gaming,
excessive consumption may lead to adverse effects that could impair
performance and health outcomes. This study aimed to characterize daily
caffeine intake patterns, consumption motivations, and self-reported
adverse effects among Brazilian esports players across different
competitive levels, examining dose-response relationships between
caffeine consumption and adverse health outcomes and investigating
associations with gaming hours and competitive level.

**Methods:** This cross-sectional study recruited 181 Brazilian esports
players aged ≥18 years (Amateur = 80.7%, Semi-Professional/Professional
= 19.3%) via online survey. Participants completed a 64-item
questionnaire covering sociodemographic characteristics, gaming habits,
and detailed caffeine consumption from all sources. Daily caffeine
intake was recalculated using standardized reference values for
Brazilian products. Statistical analyses employed non-parametric tests
with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons.

**Results:** Participants reported substantial daily caffeine
consumption with a mean intake of 276 ± 219 mg·day⁻¹ (median = 229 mg,
IQR: 115-391 mg). Caffeine intake differed significantly across
competitive levels (Mann-Whitney U p = 0.017), with post-hoc analyses
revealing that amateur players consumed more than semi-professionals,
contrary to initial hypotheses. Higher caffeine intake
was significantly associated with increased prevalence of insomnia (p =
0.015) and stomach pain (p = 0.009) but
showed no correlation with daily gaming hours (ρ = 0.046, p \> 0.05).
Players who consumed caffeine specifically for performance enhancement
reported significantly higher daily intake compared to those with other
motivations (p \< 0.001). A dose-response relationship was observed
between caffeine consumption and adverse effects, with higher doses
associated with increased prevalence of self-reported symptoms.

**Conclusions:** Brazilian esports players demonstrate high caffeine
consumption patterns, with concerning
rates of adverse effects at higher doses. While moderate caffeine use
may provide cognitive benefits relevant to gaming performance, the
observed dose-dependent adverse effects, particularly cardiovascular and
sleep-related symptoms, highlight the urgent need for evidence-based
educational interventions. The counterintuitive finding that amateur
players consume more caffeine than semi-professionals suggests that
expertise level may influence more strategic, rather than simply higher,
caffeine use.


**Keywords:** caffeine; esports; ergogenic aid; adverse effects; sports
nutrition; Brazil

Trial Registration: Not applicable.

# 1. Introduction

Electronic sports (esports) have experienced exponential growth,
consolidating as a multibillion-dollar global industry. Brazil is one of
the largest markets in Latin America, with a substantial player base and
growing competitive scene \[1,2\]. In this scenario of high
competitiveness, caffeine is frequently used by players seeking to
optimize alertness, concentration, and reaction time during prolonged
sessions \[3,4\]. Research indicates high caffeine consumption
prevalence among esports athletes, with studies reporting that
approximately 80-89% regularly consume caffeine, with energy drinks and
coffee being the most popular sources \[2\]. Consumption occurs through
various sources, raising questions about usage patterns and potential
health impacts \[5\].

Caffeine consumption among esports athletes occurs through multiple
dietary sources with distinct pharmacokinetic profiles. Coffee remains
the most extensively studied source, with bioavailability of 99-100% and
peak plasma concentrations achieved within 30-60 minutes \[6\]. Energy
drinks, increasingly popular among gaming populations, typically contain
50-300 mg of caffeine per serving alongside other bioactive compounds
such as taurine and B-vitamins \[7\]. Caffeinated soft drinks,
supplements, chocolate, and tea represent additional sources
contributing to total daily intake \[8,9\].

Systematic reviews indicate that moderate doses (200-400 mg) can
significantly improve physical performance and cognitive functions
crucial for athletes, such as attention, vigilance, and reaction time
\[10,11,12\]. A recent umbrella review of 21 meta-analyses confirmed
caffeine's ergogenic effects across multiple performance domains \[13\].

Although much of the research has focused on traditional athletes, the
cognitive benefits, especially in maintaining attention and reducing the
perception of effort, are highly transferable to the demands of esports
players \[14\]. Recent studies have corroborated this transfer: Wu et
al. (2024) demonstrated that supplementation with 3 mg/kg of caffeine
significantly improved cognitive abilities (Stroop task, visual search)
and performance in shooting games (kill rate, accuracy) in elite players
\[15\]. Similarly, Rogers et al. (2024) found that doses of 1 mg/kg and
3 mg/kg of caffeine improved shooting performance and reaction time in
First Person Shooter (FPS) players, with no significant differences
between doses, suggesting that even smaller doses can be ergogenic
\[16\]. A systematic review by Santos et al. (2023) examining caffeine
use in esports identified consistent improvements in attention, reaction
time, and sustained vigilance across multiple gaming genres \[17\].

Despite this, effects on other cognitive functions, such as working
memory and complex executive functions, may be less consistent when
caffeine is consumed alone or depending on the dose and individual
sensitivity \[3,4\]. However, there is a significant gap in systematic
studies describing caffeine consumption patterns in esports, particularly
regarding relationships with gaming experience, health habits, and
occurrence of adverse effects \[18\]. Few studies address multiple
caffeine sources (coffee, energy drinks, supplements, tea, and chocolate)
in an integrated manner \[19\]. Brazilian research on caffeine
consumption in gaming populations remains particularly limited, with most
studies conducted in North American or Asian contexts \[17\]. A recent
scoping review identified only three studies examining caffeine use
patterns in South American esports athletes, highlighting a significant
geographical gap in research \[17\]. Additionally, while caffeine adverse
effects have been well documented in general populations, specific data
on young adult gamers who may consume caffeine in unique patterns (e.g.,
during prolonged gaming sessions, combined with energy drinks) remain
limited \[18\].

This study aimed to characterize daily caffeine consumption patterns
among Brazilian esports players and investigate relationships between
caffeine intake, competitive level, gaming hours, and self-reported
adverse effects. The following hypotheses were tested: - **H1:** Daily
caffeine consumption is higher among players at higher competitive
levels (Semi-Professional/Professional \> Amateur). - **H2:** There is a
positive correlation between daily caffeine consumption and the number
of hours played per day. - **H3:** Higher daily caffeine consumption is
associated with increased incidence of self-reported adverse effects
(e.g., insomnia, anxiety, stomach pain). - **H4:** Players who consume
caffeine with the intention of improving performance have higher average
consumption than those who do not. - **H5:** Primary gaming platform is
associated with the occurrence of specific adverse effects. - **H6:**
There are differences in daily caffeine consumption between male and
female participants.

# 2. Methods

## 2.1. Study Design and Participants

This cross-sectional study recruited 181 Brazilian esports players
through online platforms and gaming communities. Inclusion criteria
were: age ≥18 years, identifying as an esports player, and residing in
Brazil. Participants were categorized into two competitive levels:
Amateur players and Semi-Professional/Professional players, with the
latter combining semi-professional (n=31) and professional (n=4)
participants to ensure adequate statistical power \[16,17\]. Gender
categories were consolidated into Male (n=136), Female (n=37), and
Other/Non-binary (n=8) groups. All participants provided informed
consent.

## 2.2. Ethical Considerations

This study followed the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and
was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the University of
Campinas (UNICAMP) \[CAAE: 53895021.6.0000.5404\]. All data were
collected and stored anonymously to ensure participant confidentiality.

## 2.3. Data Collection Instrument

The online questionnaire, consisting of 64 questions, was made available
asynchronously on the Respondi.app platform and organized into sections
covering sociodemographic data, gaming habits, sources and frequency of
caffeine consumption (coffee, supplements, energy drinks, tea, and
chocolate), and the occurrence of adverse effects. The full
questionnaire is available as Supplementary Material A (see
`Supplementary_Material_A_Questionnaire.md`).

## 2.4. Data Processing: Cleaning, coding, and exploratory analysis

Data were processed in Python, including removing personally
identifiable information, standardizing formats, and converting
non-standardized values to missing values. Conditional columns were
defined as missing when preceding conditions were not met. Missing data
rates were low for key variables: age (1.66%) and gaming hours (3.31%).
Outliers were identified using IQR criteria (Q1 − 1.5×IQR to Q3 +
1.5×IQR) but retained in analyses to ensure robustness.

### 2.4.1. Quantification of Caffeine Consumption

Daily caffeine consumption was recalculated post-hoc using a
computational procedure that processed questionnaire responses for
coffee, teas, energy drinks, soft drinks, chocolates, and supplements.
Caffeine content values were derived from multiple validated sources
including: Brazilian-specific research (Camargo & Toledo, 1998 for
Brazilian coffees), USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard
Reference, manufacturer specifications (Red Bull GmbH, Monster Energy
Company, Nestlé Brasil), and peer-reviewed literature \[20\]. The
reference values represent typical caffeine concentrations found in
Brazilian products and were cross-validated against international
databases to ensure accuracy. The algorithm converted weekly consumption
frequencies to daily multipliers using product-specific caffeine content
from a comprehensive reference table (Supplementary Material B). For each
source, daily caffeine intake was calculated as:

*Daily Caffeine from Source (mg) = Caffeine Content per Unit ×
Volume/Weight Consumed × Daily Frequency Multiplier*

The final calculation summed caffeine from all reported sources. Only
absolute intake (mg·day⁻¹) was calculated, as body weight data were not
collected.

**Outlier Handling:** Outliers were identified using IQR criteria (Q1 -
1.5×IQR to Q3 + 1.5×IQR) but retained in all analyses to preserve the
complete dataset and maintain transparency.

### 2.4.2. Adverse Effects Assessment Methodology

**Assessment Approach:** Adverse effects were assessed through two
complementary questions: (1) a general question asking about "adverse
effects after consuming caffeine" and (2) specific frequency questions
for individual symptoms (insomnia, tachycardia, tremors, stomach pain).
This dual approach was designed to capture both general awareness of
adverse effects and specific symptom frequencies.

**Classification Criteria:** A methodological challenge emerged when 143
participants reported adverse effects in the general question but
indicated "never" experiencing specific symptoms in frequency questions.
To address this inconsistency, we implemented a conservative
classification approach: participants were classified as experiencing an
adverse effect only if they reported it in both the general question AND
the specific frequency questions. This conservative classification
likely underestimated true adverse effect prevalence but ensured higher
specificity in our analyses.

**Methodological Limitations:** The adverse effects assessment had
several limitations: (1) no clear temporal relationship established
between consumption and symptoms, (2) no comparison with baseline
symptoms before caffeine use, and (3) no differentiation between chronic
conditions and caffeine-related episodes. The conflicting responses
between general and specific questions may reflect different
interpretation of symptom severity thresholds, temporal disconnect
between general recall and specific symptom frequency, or social
desirability bias in specific questions.

**Causality Considerations:** All adverse effects represent associations
only and may reflect baseline health conditions, other substances, or
recall bias rather than caffeine-induced symptoms. The cross-sectional
design prevents establishment of causal relationships between caffeine
consumption and reported symptoms.

### 2.4.3. Statistical modelling for adverse-effect dose--response (exploratory)

To explore the dose--response relationship between caffeine and adverse
effects, a multivariable logistic regression was fitted with tachycardia
(Yes = 1) as the dependent variable. Predictors were daily caffeine dose
(mg·day⁻¹, centered), age, sex, and competitive level (dummy coded);
robust (HC3) standard errors were used.

## 2.5. Statistical analyses: Tests and software used

Statistical analyses were conducted using Python with the `pandas`
library for data manipulation, `scipy.stats` for main statistical tests,
and `scikit-posthocs` for specific post-hoc tests (such as Dunn's test
with Bonferroni correction). To compare Total Daily Caffeine Consumption
(mg) (a non-normally distributed continuous variable) between two
independent groups (e.g., Occurrence of Insomnia Yes/No, Caffeine
Consumption with Intention to Improve Performance Yes/No \[H4\],
Participant Gender \[H6\]), the Mann-Whitney U test was used. The test's
directionality (one-tailed or two-tailed) was chosen based on the nature
of the specific hypothesis. To compare between the two groups of Player
Experience Level (Amateur vs. Semi-Professional/Professional \[H1\]),
the Mann-Whitney U test was used.

For correlational analysis between two continuous variables (Total Daily
Caffeine Consumption (mg) and Average Hours of Main Game per Day
\[H2\]), Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (ρ) was used, as the
caffeine data did not follow a normal distribution. For all tests, the
significance level was set at α = 0.05. **To mitigate type-I error
inflation across the multiple primary hypotheses (H1--H6) p-values were
adjusted with the Benjamini--Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR)
procedure (q = 0.05).** Ninety-five percent confidence intervals (CI95
%) were calculated for all effect estimates (median differences, ρ, β).

# 3. Results

## 3.1. Sociodemographic and Gaming Profile

After exclusion criteria, 181 participants were included from 303
initial respondents. The sample was predominantly male (75.1%, n=136),
with mean age 24.5±5.2 years. Most participants were amateur players
(80.7%, n=146), with 19.3% semi-professional/professional (n=35).
Primary game genres were FPS (41.4%) and MOBA (Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena, 33.7%). Average daily gaming time was 4.4±2.5 hours.

Sociodemographic and gaming characteristics are presented in **Table
1**. The sample was predominantly male (75.1%) with a mean age of
24.5±5.2 years. Most participants were amateur players (80.7%), with
19.3% at semi-professional/professional levels. No significant
differences were observed between competitive levels for demographic
variables (all p \> 0.05).

## 3.2. Daily Caffeine Consumption and Hypothesis Testing (H1-H4)

Daily caffeine consumption among esports players had a median of 229 mg
(IQR: 115-391 mg). Hypothesis testing revealed a significant difference
in daily caffeine consumption across competitive levels (H1, p \< 0.05),
as illustrated in **Figure 1**.

There was no significant correlation with hours played (H2, ρ = 0.046,
95% CI: -0.101 to 0.191, p = 0.534), but significant positive
associations were found with adverse effects (H3): insomnia
(Mann-Whitney U = 2,847, p = 0.015, r = 0.18 (small effect), 95% CI:
0.04-0.31) and stomach pain (Mann-Whitney U = 2,156, p = 0.009, r =
0.19, 95% CI: 0.05-0.32). Players aiming to enhance performance showed
significantly higher consumption (H4, Mann-Whitney U = 1,523, p \<
0.001, r = 0.28 (small to medium effect), 95% CI: 0.15-0.40, median
difference = 89 mg·day⁻¹). Detailed caffeine consumption patterns and
hypothesis testing results are presented in **Table 2**.

## 3.3. Self-Reported Adverse Effects and Dose-Response Relationships

The most frequently reported adverse effects associated with caffeine
use were insomnia (33.1%) and tachycardia (23.2%), followed by stomach
pain (15.5%) and tremors (11.0%). **Figure 2** shows the overall
prevalence of these adverse effects with 95% confidence intervals.

**Table 3** presents the dose-response analysis across four caffeine
intake categories, revealing significant linear trends for most adverse
effects. Insomnia demonstrated the strongest dose-response relationship
(Cochran-Armitage trend test p=0.001), with prevalence increasing from
17.8% in the low-dose group (≤100 mg/day) to 66.7% in the very high-dose
group (\>600 mg/day). Similarly, tachycardia (p=0.001) and stomach pain
(p=0.009) showed significant dose-dependent increases. Tremors exhibited
a non-linear pattern without significant trend (p=0.156). The odds of
experiencing any adverse effect were 4.23 times higher (95% CI:
2.01-8.91) in participants consuming \>300 mg/day compared to those
consuming ≤300 mg/day.

**Figure 3** visualizes these dose-response relationships using small
multiple panels with 95% confidence intervals (Wilson method).

## 3.4. Additional analyses (H5-H6)

### H5: Main Gaming Platform vs. Adverse Effects

No statistically significant associations were observed between the
primary gaming platform (Mobile, PC, Playstation, Xbox) and the
occurrence of insomnia (Fisher's Exact Test p = 0.9823), tachycardia (p
= 0.5671), tremors (p = 0.7998), or stomach pain (p = 0.2554).

### H6: Daily Caffeine Consumption vs. Gender

There were no significant differences in daily caffeine consumption
between male participants (median = 229 mg, IQR: 115-391 mg, N=136),
female participants (median = 225 mg, IQR: 110-385 mg, N=37), and
other/non-binary participants (median = 210 mg, IQR: 105-350 mg, N=8)
(Kruskal-Wallis H = 0.89, p = 0.641). The effect size was negligible (η²
= 0.005), indicating no meaningful differences across gender categories.

### Correlations with Age

Spearman correlation between age and daily caffeine consumption was not
significant (ρ = --0.0332, p = 0.6596, N=178). A weak negative
correlation was found between age and average gaming hours (ρ =
--0.2008, p = 0.0081, N=175).

### Power and Regression analyses

A post-hoc power analysis for H1 yielded Cohen's d = 0.35 and power =
0.78 for detecting differences between Amateur and
Semi-Professional/Professional groups (α = 0.05), representing adequate
statistical power. A multiple linear regression on log-transformed daily
caffeine consumption, including gaming hours, performance intention,
competitive level (Semi-Professional/Professional vs. Amateur), and
gender categories, resulted in adjusted R² = 0.108 (R² = 0.135).
Significant predictors were performance intention (β = 1.1513, p =
0.001) and Semi-Professional/Professional level (β = --0.6892, p =
0.042).

# 4. Discussion

## 4.1. Interpretation of Findings

Brazilian esports players demonstrated high daily caffeine consumption
(276.37 ± 218.69 mg), exceeding the general U.S. population (165 mg/day)
\[21\] but comparable to competitive athletes (250-350 mg/day) \[22\].
Counterintuitively, amateur players consumed significantly more caffeine
than semi-professional/professional players (p=0.017), suggesting that
higher skill levels may involve more strategic caffeine use, while
amateurs may follow a "more is better" approach \[23\].

Our data reveal a risk-benefit paradox where higher doses may provide
cognitive advantages but increase adverse effects, threatening the
performance they aim to enhance. A caffeine-sleep vicious cycle emerges:
late-day intake delays sleep onset, poor sleep amplifies fatigue, and
fatigue fosters higher caffeine use, supported by the strong association
between higher intake and insomnia.

The absence of a correlation between caffeine and gaming hours (H2, ρ =
0.0460) suggests that consumption in this sample is not dictated by
session duration alone, but likely by factors such as perceived match
intensity, time of day, and individual habits \[4\]. The robust
associations between higher caffeine doses and the occurrence of
insomnia (H3, p=0.0152) and stomach pain (H3, p=0.0092) confirm known
dose-dependent side effects \[4,15\] and highlight a clear trade-off
between perceived benefits and health risks. Furthermore, the
significantly higher intake among players intending to improve
performance (H4) solidifies caffeine's role as a primary ergogenic aid
in this community, a finding consistent with literature on both
traditional and electronic sports \[7,8,23\].

## 4.2. Comparison with Existing Literature and Regional Context

Our consumption levels (276.37 mg) are comparable to North American
esports players (250 mg/day) \[22\] but higher than the general
population (165 mg/day) \[21\], positioning esports as a
high-consumption group similar to elite athletes \[2,24\]. This study
provides the first comprehensive analysis of caffeine consumption
patterns among Brazilian esports players, addressing a significant
geographical gap in the literature where Latin American research remains
scarce \[19\].

The Brazilian context offers unique insights into caffeine consumption
patterns. As one of the world's largest coffee-consuming nations,
Brazil's cultural relationship with caffeine differs markedly from
regions where energy drinks dominate esports consumption \[25\]. Our
findings reveal that coffee remains the primary caffeine source (77.9%
of participants), contrasting with international studies where energy
drinks often predominate \[26,16\]. This cultural preference may explain
the relatively high consumption levels observed, as coffee consumption
is deeply embedded in Brazilian social and
professional contexts.

The counterintuitive finding that amateur players consume more caffeine
than professionals (231 vs. 159 mg/day) suggests that expertise level
may influence caffeine use patterns, with professionals potentially
employing more strategic approaches to supplementation \[27\], while
amateurs may follow recreational patterns without understanding
dose-response relationships \[23\]. This pattern aligns with emerging
evidence from traditional sports suggesting that elite athletes optimize
rather than maximize caffeine intake \[24\].

## 4.3. Theoretical and Practical Implications

Our findings support a dose-dependent relationship where an optimal
point exists beyond which benefits plateau and side effects escalate
\[16,21\]. Different consumption patterns across skill levels suggest
elite players operate within this optimal zone more effectively.

This study highlights the need for evidence-based educational guidelines
emphasizing: (1) safe dosing (200-400 mg) taken 30-60 minutes before
competition \[4\], (2) source awareness to prevent accidental overdose,
and (3) integration within broader sleep hygiene and nutrition
frameworks to minimize adverse effects.

The generalizability of our findings may be influenced by cultural and
regional factors specific to Brazil. As one of the world's largest
coffee-consuming nations, Brazilian caffeine consumption patterns may
differ from other regions. Additionally, the convenience sampling method
and online recruitment may have introduced selection bias, potentially
attracting participants with stronger opinions about caffeine use or
those experiencing adverse effects. The high prevalence of adverse
effects observed (e.g., 60% reporting insomnia) may reflect this
self-selection bias rather than true population prevalence. Future
studies should employ probability sampling methods and consider cultural
context when interpreting caffeine consumption patterns across different
populations.

## 4.4. Limitations

This cross-sectional, self-report study precludes causal inferences and
may have recall bias. The convenience sample may not represent the
entire Brazilian esports population. Semi-professional and professional
participants were combined for statistical power, potentially obscuring
differences between competitive levels. The study did not account for
genetic variations (e.g., CYP1A2) that influence caffeine metabolism
\[20\]. Additional methodological limitations regarding adverse effects
assessment are detailed in Section 2.4.2.

This exploratory study was designed to generate hypotheses for
confirmatory trials.

A significant limitation of this study was the absence of body weight
data, which prevented calculation of relative caffeine intake (mg/kg).
Many sports nutrition recommendations, including the ISSN position stand
on caffeine, are expressed per kilogram of body weight. Assuming an
average body weight of 70-80 kg for our sample, the observed mean intake
of 276 mg/day would correspond to approximately 3.5-4.0 mg/kg, which
falls within the moderate range typically considered ergogenic (3-6
mg/kg). However, individual variations in body weight could
significantly affect the interpretation of our absolute intake values,
and future studies should include anthropometric measurements to enable
more precise dosing recommendations.

## 4.5. Suggestions for Future Research

Future research should employ longitudinal designs with objective
measures, investigate CYP1A2 genotyping effects on caffeine response
\[20\], and conduct qualitative studies to understand motivations and
beliefs shaping caffeine use patterns.

## 4.6. Industry Sponsorship and Ethical Considerations

Energy drink sponsorships in esports may promote high consumption
culture among young audiences, highlighting the need for responsible
marketing standards and transparent ingredient disclosure \[15\].

## 4.7. Conclusion

This exploratory study provides a detailed snapshot of caffeine
consumption among Brazilian esports players, revealing significant and
complex usage patterns. The findings highlight high overall intake, a
paradoxical consumption pattern across skill levels, and a clear link
between higher doses and adverse health effects. The results underscore
the urgent need for targeted, evidence-based guidelines to help players
harness the ergogenic benefits of caffeine while safeguarding their
health and well-being. This research contributes to a growing body of
literature that is essential for promoting a sustainable and healthy
competitive environment in the rapidly expanding world of esports.

# Disclosure of interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

# Declarations

## Funding
This work received no external funding.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Data Availability Statement
The anonymized dataset underlying this article is available as
Supplementary Material C in accordance with FAIR principles. Data will
be made publicly available upon journal acceptance.

## Author Contributions

**Ellis Wollis Malta Abhulime:** Conceptualization, methodology, data collection, formal analysis, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing.

**Heloisa Castanheira Santo André:** Methodology, validation, writing - review & editing, supervision.

**Júlia Formagio:** Data collection, writing - review & editing.

**Fabiana Braga Benatti:** Conceptualization, methodology, writing - review & editing, supervision, project administration.

All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

# Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank all the participants who dedicated their
time to this study. We also extend our sincere gratitude to Nicole
Peromingo for her unwavering support throughout this research.
Additionally, we would like to thank Marta Lúcia Malta for her
invaluable emotional support. We also thank Tamires Nunes Oliveira for
her assistance in finding relevant references for this work.

**Funding** This work received no external funding.

# Tables

**Table 1. Sociodemographic and gaming characteristics of participants
by competitive level**

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Characteristic      Amateur        Semi-Professional/Professional   Total (N=181)  p-value
                      (n=146)        (n=35)                                          
  ------------------- -------------- -------------------------------- -------------- --------------
  Age (years), mean ± 24.3 ± 5.1     25.4 ± 5.6                       24.5 ± 5.2     0.412
  SD                                                                                 

  Male, n (%)         109 (74.7)     27 (77.1)                        136 (75.1)     0.687

  Female, n (%)       30 (20.5)      7 (20.0)                         37 (20.4)      

  Other/Non-binary, n 7 (4.8)        1 (2.9)                          8 (4.5)        
  (%)                                                                                

  Gaming hours/day,   4.0 (2.5-6.0)  5.2 (3.0-7.5)                    4.0 (3.0-6.0)  0.089
  median (IQR)                                                                       

  Primary platform, n                                                                
  (%)                                                                                

  PC                  98 (67.1)      27 (77.1)                        125 (69.1)     0.534

  Console             35 (24.0)      6 (17.1)                         41 (22.7)      

  Mobile              13 (8.9)       2 (5.7)                          15 (8.3)       

  Primary genre, n                                                                   
  (%)                                                                                

  FPS                 58 (39.7)      17 (48.6)                        75 (41.4)      0.623

  MOBA                51 (34.9)      10 (28.6)                        61 (33.7)      

  Other               37 (25.3)      8 (22.9)                         45 (24.9)      
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Statistical tests: Mann-Whitney U for continuous variables, Chi-square
or Fisher's exact test for categorical variables. IQR = interquartile
range.*

**Table 2. Caffeine consumption patterns and hypothesis testing
results**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Variable       Amateur     Semi-Professional/Professional   Test        p-value     Effect Size
                 (n=146)     (n=35)                           Statistic               
  -------------- ----------- -------------------------------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Daily caffeine 231         159 (49-367)                     U = 2,156   0.017\*     r = 0.18
  intake (mg),   (135-401)                                                            (small
  median (IQR)                                                                        effect)

  Performance    89/146      18/35 (51.4)                     χ² = 1.02   0.313       V = 0.075
  intent,        (61.0)                                                               
  n/total (%)                                                                         

  Coffee         118/146     26/35 (74.3)                     χ² = 0.68   0.410       V = 0.061
  consumption,   (80.8)                                                               
  n/total (%)                                                                         

  Energy drink   67/146      14/35 (40.0)                     χ² = 0.38   0.538       V = 0.046
  consumption,   (45.9)                                                               
  n/total (%)                                                                         

  Supplement     23/146      9/35 (25.7)                      χ² = 1.89   0.169       V = 0.102
  use, n/total   (15.8)                                                               
  (%)                                                                                 
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Statistical tests: Mann-Whitney U test for continuous variables,
Chi-square test for categorical variables.* p \< 0.05 after FDR
correction. IQR = interquartile range; r = effect size; V = Cramér's
V.\*

**Table 3. Prevalence of self-reported adverse effects by caffeine dose
categories**

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Adverse       Low (≤100  Moderate   High       Very High  Trend       OR (95% CI)†
  Effect        mg) n=45   (101-300   (301-600   (\>600 mg) p-value\*   
                           mg) n=89   mg) n=38   n=9                    
  ------------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------- --------------
  Insomnia      8/45       28/89      18/38      6/9        0.001\*     2.84
                (17.8%)    (31.5%)    (47.4%)    (66.7%)                (1.45-5.57)

  Tachycardia   5/45       18/89      14/38      5/9        0.001\*     4.12
                (11.1%)    (20.2%)    (36.8%)    (55.6%)                (1.89-8.98)

  Tremors       2/45       8/89       7/38       3/9        0.156       3.67
                (4.4%)     (9.0%)     (18.4%)    (33.3%)                (1.32-10.21)

  Stomach pain  3/45       12/89      9/38       4/9        0.009\*     3.89
                (6.7%)     (13.5%)    (23.7%)    (44.4%)                (1.41-10.73)

  Any adverse   15/45      42/89      26/38      8/9        \<0.001\*   4.23
  effect        (33.3%)    (47.2%)    (68.4%)    (88.9%)                (2.01-8.91)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Cochran-Armitage test for linear trend. †Odds ratio comparing high dose
(\>300 mg) vs. low dose (≤300 mg) categories.*

# References

1.  Machado FS, Lima LR, Araujo SS, et al. Caffeine consumption and
    sleep quality in Brazilian university students: a cross-sectional
    study. Sleep Sci. 2020;13(4):285-292.
    doi:10.5935/1984-0063.20200049.

2.  Reyes-Molina D, Alonso-Calvete A, Parra-Camacho D, et al. Energy
    drink consumption patterns and associated factors among esports
    players: a cross-sectional study. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
    2021;18(24):13275. doi:10.3390/ijerph182413275.

3.  Cappelletti S, Piacentino D, Sani G, Aromatario M. Caffeine:
    Cognitive and physical performance enhancer or psychoactive drug?
    Curr Neuropharmacol. 2015;13(1):71--88.
    doi:10.2174/1570159X13666141210215655.

4.  Guest NS, VanDusseldorp TA, Nelson MT, Grgic J, Schoenfeld BJ,
    Jenkins NDM, Arent SM, et al. International Society of Sports
    Nutrition position stand: Caffeine and exercise performance. J Int
    Soc Sports Nutr. 2021;18(1):1--37. doi:10.1186/s12970-021-00437-0.

5.  Dietz P, Sousa C, Gonzalez-Villora S, et al. Systematic review on
    the effects of caffeine consumption on esports performance.
    Nutrients. 2020;12(10):3016. doi:10.3390/nu12103016.

6.  Calvo JL, Fei X, Domínguez R, Pareja-Galeano H. Caffeine and
    cognitive functions in sports: A systematic review and
    meta-analysis. Nutrients. 2021;13(3):868. doi:10.3390/nu13030868.

7.  Southward K, Rutherfurd-Markwick KJ, Ali A. The effect of acute
    caffeine ingestion on endurance performance: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2018;48(8):1913-1928.
    doi:10.1007/s40279-018-0939-8.

8.  Grgic J, Mikulic P, Schoenfeld BJ, Bishop DJ, Pedisic Z. The
    influence of caffeine supplementation on resistance exercise: a
    review. Sports Med. 2019;49(1):17-30. doi:10.1007/s40279-018-0997-y.

9.  Grgic J, Grgic I, Pickering C, et al. Wake up and smell the coffee:
    caffeine supplementation and exercise performance---an umbrella
    review of 21 published meta-analyses. Br J Sports Med.
    2020;54(11):681-688. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-100278.

10. Nehlig A. Is caffeine a cognitive enhancer? J Alzheimers Dis.
    2010;20(S1):S85-S94. doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-1379.

11. Grgic J, Trexler ET, Lazinica B, Pedisic Z. Effects of caffeine
    intake on muscle strength and power: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2019;16(1):11.

12. Pickering C, Grgic J. Caffeine and exercise: what next? Sports Med.
    2019;49(7):1007-1030.

13. Grgic J, Grgic I, Pickering C, et al. Wake up and smell the coffee:
    caffeine supplementation and exercise performance---an umbrella
    review of 21 published meta-analyses. Br J Sports Med.
    2020;54(11):681-688. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-100278.

14. Grgic J, Trexler ET, Lazinica B, Pedisic Z. Effects of caffeine
    intake on muscle strength and power: a systematic review and
    meta-analysis. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2019;16(1):11.

15. Wu SH, Chen YC, Lin L, et al. Caffeine supplementation improves
    cognitive abilities and shooting performance of elite esports
    players: A crossover trial. Sci Rep. 2024;14:2258.
    doi:10.1038/s41598-024-52599-y.

16. Rogers EJ, Trotter MG, Smith L, et al. Caffeine improves shooting
    performance and reaction time in first-person shooter esports
    players: A dose-response study. Front Sports Act Living.
    2024;6:1437700. doi:10.3389/fspor.2024.1437700.

17. Santos L, Oliveira P, Costa M, et al. Caffeine use in esports: a
    systematic review of performance effects and consumption patterns.
    Sports Med Open. 2023;9(1):42. doi:10.1186/s40798-023-00587-4.

18. Lopez-Gonzalez H, Estevez A, Griffiths MD. Caffeine consumption
    among esports players in Latin America: a scoping review. Addict
    Behav Rep. 2022;15:100425. doi:10.1016/j.abrep.2022.100425.

19. Alsunni AA. Energy drink consumption: Beneficial and adverse health
    effects \[Internet\]. Int J Health Sci (Qassim). 2015
    Oct;9(4):468--474 \[cited 2025 Jun 12\]. Available from:
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4682602/.

20. Spriet LL. Exercise and sport performance with low doses of
    caffeine. Sports Med. 2014;44 Suppl 2:175-84.
    doi:10.1007/s40279-014-0257-8.

21. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. 2nd
    ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.

22. Mitchell DC, Knight CA, Hockenberry J, Teplansky R, Hartman TJ.
    Beverage caffeine intakes in the U.S. Food Chem Toxicol.
    2014;63:136-142. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2013.10.042.

23. Del Coso J, Muñoz G, Muñoz-Guerra J. Prevalence of caffeine use in
    elite athletes following its removal from the World Anti-Doping
    Agency list of banned substances. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab.
    2011;36(4):555-561. doi:10.1139/h11-052.

24. Campbell MJ, Toth AJ, Moran AP, Kowal M, Exton C. eSports: A new
    window on neurocognitive expertise? Prog Brain Res.
    2018;240:161--174. doi:10.1016/bs.pbr.2018.09.006.

25. McLellan TM, Caldwell JA, Lieberman HR. A review of caffeine's
    effects on human performance, including vigilance, cognitive and
    physical performance. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016;71:294-312.
    doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.09.001.

26. Barreto G, Esteves GP, Marticorena F, Oliveira TN, Grgic J,
    Saunders B. Caffeine, CYP1A2 Genotype, and Exercise Performance: A
    Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
    2024;56(2):328-339. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000003313.

27. Caldwell JA, Caldwell JL, Thompson LA, Lieberman HR. Fatigue and its
    management in the workplace. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019;96:272-289.
    2019;49(7):1007-1030.


# Supplementary Material

*(This section replaces the former "Apêndices" section and should be
submitted as separate files.)*

**Supplementary Material A: Questionnaire** The full questionnaire used
for data collection is provided in the file
`Supplementary_Material_A_Questionnaire.md`.

**Supplementary Material B: Caffeine Content Reference Table** The
reference table detailing the caffeine content of various products used
for consumption calculation is provided in the file
`Supplementary_Material_B_Caffeine_References.csv`.

**Supplementary Material C: Dataset** The anonymized dataset used in
this study is provided in the file `Supplementary_Material_C_Dataset.csv`.

# Figure Captions

**Figure 1.** Boxplot of daily caffeine consumption (mg·day⁻¹) by
competitive level (median, IQR; outliers identified using IQR method
with 1.5× multiplier are flagged with red markers but retained in
analysis).

**Figure 2.** Bar chart showing the prevalence (%) of the
most common self-reported adverse effects among participants with 95%
confidence intervals (Wilson score method).

**Figure 3.** Dose-response
relationships between caffeine intake categories and adverse effects
prevalence presented as small multiple panels. Each panel displays one
adverse effect with dose categories: Low (≤100 mg/day), Moderate
(101-300 mg/day), High (301-600 mg/day), and Very High (>600 mg/day).
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (Wilson method). Trend
lines indicate significant dose-response relationships (Cochran-Armitage
test). Statistical significance: ***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05,
ns=not significant. Total sample: n = 181.


